## Full Text Search

In **Part I**, we laid the groundwork for the wine catalog with a simple search. The current application searches all wine records to find which ones have a variety, a winery, or a description field that contains the query text.

This type of "contains" comparison has several problems. First, a wine's variety or winery or description have to contain the pattern of the search query exactly to register as a match. Second, the match is binary -- it's either found or it isn't. There is no way to say which results are more relevant that the others. Third, the search is slow -- every record must be checked for a potential match every time a search is performed. We don't have an index in place to speed up the operation. Lastly, there is no way to handle misspellings.

In short, simple searches don't yield the results that users are looking for. [Full text search](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/12/textsearch-intro.html) solves the problems mentioned above and then some.

> Full Text Searching (or just text search) provides the capability to identify natural-language documents that satisfy a query, and optionally to sort them by relevance to the query.

In order to perform a full text search, Postgres follows a series of steps to compare a text document to a search query. First, Postgres breaks the document and the query into tokens by removing whitespace and punctuation. Next, it eliminates [stop words](https://www.textfixer.com/tutorials/common-english-words.txt) from the tokens. Stop words are so common that they distract from the heart of what the user is really trying to find.

Then, it uses a dictionary to *normalize* the remaining words where applicable. *Normalizing* words converts them to a stemmed version of themselves, which makes them easier to use in comparisons. For example, the words, *processed* and *processing*, will both be normalized to the stem, *process*. Searching for *processed* will yield results that contain the word *processing*. Lastly, Postgres converts the document and the query to special `tsvector` or `tsquery` data structures respectively. These data structures hold the words and their locations within the original text.

Want to see the conversion in action? Open your `psql` CLI and run the following command.

```sql
SELECT to_tsvector('This text will be processed for full text searching.');
```

You should see the following result.

```
'full':7 'process':5 'search':9 'text':2,8
```

We'll explore the ins and outs of full text search in the subsequent sections.
