## Docker

If you followed the instructions in the **Initial Setup** section of this tutorial, then you should have Docker installed on your local machine. Open the Docker application and start it.

> **Docker in 30 seconds or less.**
>
> Docker allows you to package software in a container that includes everything it needs to run. Remember how we used a virtual environment on our local machine to hold all of our Python dependencies? Docker containers are like virtual environments that include code, runtime, system tools, and libraries. Your Docker container is a machine within your local machine. Everything you need to run your software exists within the boundaries of the container. Learn more [here](https://www.docker.com/resources/what-container).

Make sure you're still in the *server* directory and add a *Dockerfile* file with the following code.

```Dockerfile
# server/Dockerfile

FROM python:3.8

RUN [ "mkdir", "-p", "/usr/src/app" ]

WORKDIR /usr/src/app

COPY requirements.txt requirements.txt

RUN [ "pip", "install", "--upgrade", "pip" ]

RUN [ "pip", "install", "-r", "requirements.txt" ]

COPY . .
```

The *Dockerfile* tells Docker how to build the [image](https://www.docker.com/resources/what-container) that your container will invoke during runtime. The `FROM python:3.8` command tells Docker to start with a Linux [base image](https://hub.docker.com/_/python/) that has Python 3.8 installed on it.

The next few commands tell Docker to:
1. Make a new */usr/src/app* directory in the container
1. Set it as the working directory (similar to using `cd` to step inside it)
1. Copy the *requirements.txt* file from your local machine's *server* directory to the new directory in the container
1. Update `pip`
1. Install all Python dependencies
1. Copy all of the files in your local machine's *server* directory to the new directory in the container

Next, add a *.dockerignore* file with the following code.

```conf
# server/.dockerignore

.dockerignore
*.pyc
__pycache__
.vscode
venv
```

The `.dockerignore` file tells Docker to ignore all of the files and directories listed within. These files will not be copied into the Docker container. For example, we don't need the *venv* directory in the Docker container because we install the Python dependencies directly onto the container's machine.

Change directories up one level, so that you are at your project's root. Create a new *docker-compose.yml* file with the following code.

```yml
# docker-compose.yml

version: '3.7'

services:
  server:
    build:
      context: ./server
    container_name: perusable-server
    command: [ "bash", "start.sh" ]
    ports:
      - 8001:8000
    volumes:
      - ./server:/usr/src/app
```

While the `Dockerfile` defines how to build an image that a single container will use, the `docker-compose.yml` file describes how multiple containers will interact with each other.

> Learn more about Docker Compose [here](https://docs.docker.com/compose/overview/).

Our *docker-compose.yml* file defines a single `server` service named `perusable-server`. We can give the service and the container any names we want, but I chose these to make their intentions clear. The `server` service will run the Django app server. Django will run on port 8000 *within the Docker container* and will expose port 8001 for our *local machine* to access the service. When the container starts, it will execute our *start.sh* file, which will run the `migrate` and `runserver` Django management commands. One more thing -- the *server* directory on your local machine is shared with the */usr/src/app* directory in the Docker container. That means every time you add or change a file on your machine, it will be automatically updated in the Docker container.

Now we're ready to start our Docker container. Run the following code in your terminal from your project's root directory.

```
docker-compose up --build
```

After the terminal stops spitting out text, visit [http://localhost:8001](http://localhost:8001) in your browser. You should see the confirmation screen.

> In a separate terminal, run `docker container ls`. Do you see the container named `perusable-server` running? You should!

Stop the Docker container by pressing `CTRL+C` on your keyboard and then run `docker-compose down` in your terminal.

At this point, your directory structure should look like the following. (The *venv* directory and compiled files are hidden.)

```
.
├── docker-compose.yml
└── server
    ├── .dockerignore
    ├── Dockerfile
    ├── perusable
    │   ├── catalog
    │   │   ├── __init__.py
    │   │   ├── admin.py
    │   │   ├── apps.py
    │   │   ├── migrations
    │   │   │   └── __init__.py
    │   │   ├── models.py
    │   │   ├── tests.py
    │   │   └── views.py
    │   ├── db.sqlite3
    │   ├── manage.py
    │   └── perusable
    │       ├── __init__.py
    │       ├── asgi.py
    │       ├── settings.py
    │       ├── urls.py
    │       └── wsgi.py
    ├── requirements.txt
    └── start.sh
```
